# CS-465 - Full Stack Development I
CS-465 Full Stack Development with MEAN

## Architecture
### Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).
#### Express HTML
Express HTML was used for serving static files from the web server. Before files are transfered to the client, the templating/view engine [Handlebars](https://handlebarsjs.com/) processes given templating files (such as HTML), replacing marked content with requested data. Consider something like the meals section of the main Travlr Getaways web page. When a user requests to view this page, first meals stored on the server are fetched, forwarded to the templating engine with the corresponding HTML file for processing, and then forwarded/rendered to the client.
#### JavaScript
JavaScript is a programming language used primarily for defining the functionality of a web page. Although intended for front-end/client-side development (for a user's web browser), it has been heavily adopted for use on the server-side through the use of [Node.js](https://nodejs.org). This project used the "MEAN" technological stack for development, which consists of [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/), [Express](https://expressjs.com/), [Angular](https://angular.io/) and [Node.js](https://nodejs.org). The question may arise why these four specific technologies were combined together to form this stack, and the reason is all of them are JavaScript based. This means that the same language is used throughout, allowing for more streamlined development.
#### Single-Page Application (SPA)
A Single-Page Application (SPA) differs from a traditional web app, in that it typically uses a single HTML file, dynamically swapping/replacing the contents of the page based on the given state. The [Angular](https://angular.io/) framework was used to develop an SPA for the administrative side of the Travlr Getaways application. An SPA introduces many benefits, the most significant of which being added responsiveness to the website. When switching to a "different page," the contents of the current page are dynamically replaced, which allows for smooth and seamless transitions to different parts of the app.

### Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?
[MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/) differs from traditional SQL databases, in that it follows the NoSQL/non-relational model. It uses the concept of storing documents in collections versus tables with rows and columns. Use of MongoDB yields many benefits, especially when an application is being prototyped and the complete final structure has not been defined yet. As there are no pre-defined schemas, documents/data can essentially take on any "shape," without requiring an entire modification of the database.

## Functionality
### How is JSON different from Javascript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?
JSON (or JavaScript Object Notation) is useful for storing data in a key/value pair format. It it commonly used with the implementation of REST APIs, and was used in this project as well. Using JSON ties the front and backend together, considering MongoDB stores documents essentially in JSON format, and requests/responses are fulfilled using JSON as the format of data. Further, JSON data can be easily converted into literal JavaScript objects, for operations and more.
### Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies, and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.
The biggest refactoring of code occurred in the early stages of the project's development, when it was restructured to use the "Model-View-Controller" (or MVC) architecture. The "model" consisted of the back-end MongoDB database and its models of data. The "view" consisted of each HTML template file for transfer to the client. Finally, the "controller" consisted of handlers for the various endpoints to be served. Using this architecture for application development allows for the idea of "separation of concerns," which is defined as dividing an application into individual "units," each with their own purpose. Alongside the MVC restructuring, consider the implementation of different directories for the "app_api" and "app_server." Each of these folders consist of the required components to serve that specific part of the application, further tying into that idea of separation of concers, considering development for each part of the application can be performed without necessarily requiring changes to another.

## Testing
### Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.
#### Methods
HTTP Methods (or verbs), are types of requests that can be made from a client to a server. The five most prominent of these consist of GET, POST, PUT, PATCH and DELETE. Consider someone who wishes to fetch a resource (such as the available trip packages to purchase with this application). The client could make a GET request to the server to fetch the list of trips stored in the database. However, what if they wanted to add a trip to the database? A POST request could then be made, containing request data for what trip to add and more. The server can handle requests differently based on the method used when the request was made.
#### Endpoints
Endpoints can be thought of as the different directories or available locations on a web server which clients can make requests to. Consider a website for a blog. They may have a domain name such as https://myblog.com. However, depending on what it is the client wishes to do, the server may offer different endpoints for access. Say a user wishes to view a list of posts. It would be intuitive to then create an endpoint for "/posts," such that when a client enters the URL https://myblog.com/posts, they would then be provided with a list of posts stored on the server for viewing. The use of endpoints in the Travlr Getaways application was essential, as there are different services provided. The root endpoint (/) allows for viewing of the main website. The API endpoint (/api) consists of sub-routes/endpoints, for different services provided by the API. Consider the /api/trips endpoint, allowing for fetching, addition, modification and removal of trips from the database.
#### Security
Best practices in regard to security in a full-stack web application is crucial, as it is likely sensitive data is to be stored. The first issue that was addressed was proper storage of login credentials for users. Encryption was used for storing passwords, which prevents bad actors from being able to easily hijack user accounts, even if their credentials are compromised. Although this allows for greater security, another approach could be using social login based authentication. Users could be allowed to login/register using their Facebook, Instagram, X account (or what have you), which only requires storage of their unique user ID in the database for that given service. This would eliminate the need for storing something like a user's password, and worrying about the potential of it becoming compromised. An issue with this approach however is that an API key is usually required to be supplied with each login request through one of these services, and they tend to limit the amount of requests that can be made per day (or on a certain interval). Moving away from that, one notable downside of following the route of using an SPA (such as here) is that it requires careful consideration of what data is being stored, considering much of the data and processing is offloaded to the client-side. Data stored on the client-side (or the web browser) can be easily viewed and modified at any time. This is why JWT tokens were used, which basically means that following a successful login/registration through the server, the user is then provided an encrypted key (saved in their browser), which is used for each subsequent request made to various API endpoints on the server. This allows for restricted access to operations such as adding trips to the database. Further, assume a user's token is compromised, as it is stored in their browser. As it is encrypted, a secret key is required (assuming symmetric encryption was used) to perform decryption and analyze its actual contents.

## Reflection
### How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?
Attendance of this course has opened the door to many possibilities for my career in general. I have always been interested in the web and mobile application development areas of computer science, and much knowledge has been gained from this course. In particular, I have gained knowledge programming in JavaScript for both the front and back-end, building/maintaining/securing a web application (especially REST APIs), and understanding the overall architecture with justification of design choices. The idea of separation of concerns was made very clear to me by developing a web application, since each endpoint (as an example) can almost be thought of as a different part or unit of the overall application. Work can be allocated towards one unit (such as the API), and another could be directed to the front-end (such as the HTML). Finally, the use of a single language throughout development creates a scenario for, especially full-stack developers, possessing the ability to implement new features or troubleshoot certain issues on both the front and back-end, while being familiar with the implementation language.
